yeah so I was just hoping to show really
the main thing I was wanting to show you
is um so I I don't know if you saw but
Steph wolf did a post on um biom
medicine and I was helping him out with
the code with that and I was just um
hoping to get your thoughts really on
how accurate or like the connections
between as someone who knows the like
real literature of you know um biology
better than me like w
where does the model fit and where
doesn't it fit basically okay yeah that
sounds great yeah you want to take me
through it yeah so I'm just going to
share my
screen okay
and yeah
so
um this is the autometa that we're using
so it's k = 4 and Ral 1
um and I don't know you're familiar with
like the cellular atom kind of rules and
stuff right MH okay yeah so
basically we ended up using k equal 4
rals 1 um because you know that's kind
of just what worked for us but basically
what we're trying to do here is these
are cellular automata and the basic idea
is we we we change one cell in the body
and then we see what happens to the
pattern um and with the idea that like
the changing cell is like a disease and
then and then eventually we're going to
look for a cell to change to try to put
it back to the original pattern
um and so
basically what we find is well um that
it's just because of the complexity of
the automa it's really hard to both to
do to do all the steps of medicine so
like um you have you have a disease
classification so for example like this
is all the possible um all the possible
perturbation not all of them but few of
the possible perturbations that you can
do to the satom by changing a single
cell
um and if we try to like put that in
feature space using a machine learning
algorithm um and try to basically
cluster the different potential diseases
into different um Cate ories we see that
it's not completely discreet meaning
like there's always going to be some in
between between diseases and so it's
potentially saying that like you know in
the textbook like in icd10 where they
they classify diseases into different
branches neatly in the real world it's
kind of suggesting that that's not
really possible completely possible um
and then like going another step it's
like um okay so now classifying diseases
now what about like um let's see making
predictions and diagnosing diseases so
one of Stephen Wolf's ideas about um
medicine is that like the medical
Observer is doesn't is basically they're
observing something much more complex
than they can possibly uh understand and
so because of that you know certain um
features emerge so for example in this
case we look at like just the width of
the automaton at um all steps
so so like the uh here the the green is
the normal disease
histogram so those are all the lifetimes
if you perturb that um
automaton and then the the yellow one is
what happens if we you know it's kind of
like when a doctor does a test and sees
that something's
wrong um which this case we're using the
width of the automaton and then
basically what that's saying is you know
it's just observing that the the
lifetimes are all messed up based
because uh the doctor observed a
different
width um and the goal is in like can
from the width of the automaton can you
predict what's going to happen to that
um kind of
organism and so what this is showing is
the orange all the orange lines are the
potential diseases and the BL or not the
potential the diseases and then the blue
line is the main guy the original and so
it's kind of like you can already see
just from the
width that there's going to be a lot of
um chaos or like it's going to be a
little bit unpredictable what's going to
happen just based on like a highle
metric like
that
um and like even if you just look at
width at a single step so this is WID at
step 25 and compared to like the
lifetime which is the length of the
pattern we can see that it's just not a
very like predictive measure um you know
you'd like it to be like a you know
you'd like to see a trend there
but so yeah
um and like we also try to use like this
this graph here is like a machine
learning prediction of based on the
width at step 25 what um lifetime will
you get
and it basically it doesn't do any
better than the median because there's
just not good data here um and so like
that's kind of one of the big like
takeaways that Stephen wolam is making
here is also that if you have like he's
saying that if you have better
interfaces with um biology then you can
end up making better predictions because
because it's complicated if we continue
to get more and more data faster then
we'll be able to make a better diagnosis
and
prognosis
um yeah and
then I don't know do you have any
thoughts or should I just keep walking
you through um well I I have a question
and then and then then we'll we'll I'll
give some thoughts um when you start
these uh these Casa uh what what what
starting string do you use like what's
the starting position for these things
Yeah so basically this is good because I
really wanted to get into this as well
when we evolve them we always start from
the this one red it's called we call it
the seed condition or it's just like one
red
cell and then what we're doing is we're
uh let me just show you we're changing
the the rules by one bit at a
time and if the if the bit results in a
longer or the same lifetime then we keep
it so it's kind of like a
mutation and then a mutation to the
rules and then if it's neutral or ADV
advantageous then we keep
it um okay and when you're talking about
lifetime uh can you uh tell me what that
is yeah so lifetime we mean uh just the
length of the
automaton so another point I should
mention is that if it if it lives
forever so a lot of times it'll you'll
do a mutation and then it'll like get
into a loop and then like live forever
which we throw we count that as a
fitness of zero or a lifetime of zero
and then so it's basically trying to get
a longer and longer finite length longer
finite length yeah okay I get
it um anyways so the the so that's kind
of a normal Evolution but the when we're
evolving these guys because because we
were looking for
like um from the perspective of medicine
we wanted them to be robust and this is
like the kind of one of the main things
I wanted to ask you about which is so
what we do
is um we do that same Evolution but we
perturb it during the evolution so this
is like an example of a single step of
evolution and then we take the minimum
Fitness um so basically if you perturb
it 10 times then you take the minimum f
so in this case it would be this 60
right here and that's then the fitness
and all that's doing is just forcing the
organism to be able to deal with uh
perturbations so so it has to like if if
it just if any one of these goes to uh
infinity or like we we sometimes call it
like cancer yeah then um all of them are
then the whole the fitness of the whole
organism is zero so it has to get really
good at not going to infinity and it
also has to get good at trying to keep
its length despite a single point
perturbation and what we see is kind of
like you may have noticed but it's kind
of we get these specific um looking
automaton which are they're kind of like
cam calls them like attractors which is
yeah they kind of have this Randomness
in the beginning and then they kind of
all eventually hit this state in this
case it's like this purple um cap and
they have this like I call it like a
programmed death so it's like no matter
what the initial conditions are they
kind of always die and
so I
mean yeah I'm just wondering how how
much of that's actually like um what you
see in
plaria
where like like is it do you think it's
something as simple as this that's that
tells them because I know that's one of
the things you you mention a lot which
is like how do these how do when you're
growing when you're doing morphology how
do how do the cells know when to stop
um so I definitely wanted to like I know
you know you you haven't seen these
before but maybe you have some thoughts
on that yeah yeah I mean we so so we've
done some work on this and I can send
you some papers I mean we've we used
this a little bit more of a complex um
CA in one case it's a neural CA in
another case it's something else but um
I'll I'll put some I'll put some papers
on the on the chat um
uh yeah and and and also and also the
planarian the planarian story is I think
uh we we we now have some some some
pretty worked out thoughts about um
what's going on with the plenary I can
sort of I can sort of go over it do you
know the uh the the competency ratchet
business does that does that ring a bell
at all um not really no all right so so
so the so the deal is is basically this
that plenaria
they at least the ones that we study
reproduce by by cut ripping themselves
in half and regenerating okay and so
unlike unlike most of us who have this
thing called weissman's barrier which is
that mutations in your body don't get
passed onto your Offspring because right
you you jettison the the Soma and it's
only the the you know the the gametes
that that move on right so you're the
the sperm and the Egg so um so we don't
we don't keep the mutations we acquir
during our our lifetime plan are are not
like that because any mutation that
doesn't kill the cell is propagated into
the Next Generation as these stem cells
reproduce right so so basically they're
accumulate so so you know for 400
million years or they've been
accumulating mutations and and they look
their genome is incredibly messy it
looks like a like like they can be mix
aoy meaning that the cells can have
different
chromosomes so so it so so it bothered
me for for for a couple of decades when
I first found out about this that the
animal that is highly regenerative
Immortal resistant to cancer is also the
one with the dirtiest genome like that's
that's the exact opposite of what
everybody tells you in in in in you know
in biology classes where you say well
the genome is very important you have to
keep it clean and because it determines
this and that so so so we we've been
we've been studying this and um uh and
and by the way there's a couple of other
interesting features which which finally
snapped into place for me a couple years
ago which is that for almost every other
model system you can call the stock
Center and you can get mutants so you
can get flies with you know curly wings
and mice with weird eyes and you know
there's the you know chickens with funny
feet you can there there are mutant
lines that you can get in plaria there
are no mutant lines the only non the
only non-standard planaria that are that
exist are our two-head form and our what
we call the cryptic form and neither of
them is genetic was created genetic
so so so so long story short and I'll
and I'll put the papers on the on the
chat here's what I think is going on
there um the biggest the the most
important thing about uh about living
tissue is that it there is not a
mechanical mapping between the genotype
and the phenotype that is not only is it
complex we all know it's not one to one
and it's complex and all that but it's
not just complexity plot tropy um
redundancy degeneracy all that stuff
it's it's not just that it's that the
middle layer that leads from The genome
to the the genotype to the phenotype is
has Intelligence what I mean by that is
it's a problem solving system and and
and um we put out something recently on
the genome being a generative model for
for uh development and then and uh
there's also there's also a cool cool
paper um on this by uh by Nick Cheney
and Kevin Mitchell so anyway the PO the
the point is this imagine imagine that
you have um like like what we found in
in our tpulse when you uh when you when
you move the the crano facial organs to
a novel location they will eventually
find their way back like the thing it
adjusts to peration so now imagine
imagine what happens um you're you're to
to a creature that has uh uh that that
that level of uh of of morphogenetic
Competency between the genotype and the
phenotype let's say let's say you make a
mutation and that mutation like all
mutations does multiple things maybe it
does something good somewhere else in
the animal but one thing it does is move
the mouth off to the side M under
standard circumstances that animal will
die because they can't eat and whatever
other consequences that mutation might
have had never get explored and so what
you would have to do otherwi what
evolution would have to do is wait until
it finds a way to do that good thing
without affecting the mouth which could
be a long time instead what happens is
uh the the the face self-corrects as
many thingss an embryogenesis do and so
now now now great lots of mutations that
otherwise would have been deleterious
become neutral and so now you get to
explore that so that's that's fine but
but but here's the other thing about it
so so that makes evolution go faster but
but but then here's the other thing uh
when that animal comes up for
selection selection doesn't know do you
have a good face because your structural
genome was great or do you have a good
face because your structural genome was
actually kind of crap but you had a lot
of Competency and you fixed it right so
as soon as you start hiding information
from selection what happens then is that
and and I'm I'll send you the paper we
we modeled all this computationally what
happens is that Evolution has a hard
time seeing the structural genome the
pressure on the genome comes off but
what it does do is crank the competency
and so all the work ends up H ends up
being spent on uh on improving the
competency and it becomes a positive
feedback loop because the more you do
that the less you can see the structural
genome so then you have to put so then
more of the effort goes into the
competency so so you get this positive
feedback loop and then what happens is a
different positions on that Spectrum I I
think plenaria are all the way to the
like it went all the way to the end in
other words plaria because their
substrate was so unreliable all the work
of evolution went into making a an
algorithm that makes a proper worm no
matter what the hardware looks like
pretty much so so so so so so they're
they're kind of the the biggest example
of that where and that's why there are
no mutant lines is because yeah you try
to edit the genome but they ignore it
because they mostly ignore their own
genome too
and so and so uh then then you have um
uh intermediate cases like salamanders
which are pretty good at regenerating
but they're not immortal like like
plaria and then you have mammals and
then all the way on the left you have
something like nematodes which are just
completely cookie cutter organisms where
where every cell is numbered and all
that so so so I so I think what's really
going on here is this this this this
deep competency
around um and and it's not just you know
when you make defects it looks like
repair but when you make really drastic
defects for example when we when we make
xenobots or anthr robots and we take the
tissue completely out of its out of its
normal context it it doesn't repair it
doesn't try to repair to the normal uh
this the standard default outcome it
makes something else and it makes
something else that's completely viable
you know that has all kinds of cool
behaviors and morphology so so the the
key here is this is this middle layer
which is the competency layer and this
is this is what what we've been modeling
and what I've been what I've been
writing about so I think
that I I you
know that's that's how in all of our
Casas that's what we've been doing so we
have the genome that comes in with the
rules we we have the fenotype which get
selected but in the in the middle it's
something like a neurala which which
really has some competencies to get
certain goals met even under under you
know all kinds of Novel conditions so so
I you know so so that's that that's
that's how I see this process and and as
far as diseases I want to recommend um
because this is really interesting
there's there's there's this guy Yuri
Alan do you know him he's like a like a
synthetic biologist in Israel he's he's
really good he has a ton of great work
um anyway uh here's the um here's the
book and I'm G to put the I'm going to
put the title on the on the chat you
should take a look at this so if if
Stephen hadn't already hasn't already
seen it he should uh this it's called
systems Medicine by Yuri Alon a l n and
the cover of it is like basically like a
periodic table like basically he's he's
he's trying to ask the question of um
what from from from physiological
circuits what can we say about the kind
of uh failure modes and and it's it's
it's you know basically basically the
the the clustering that you did for the
different diseases and everything that's
that's what he was trying to do based on
but based on on on data of of
physiological circuits of real real
physiological circuits so why why do we
have certain diseases and not so like
the morph space of possible diseases and
so
on wow yeah that's definitely something
that's definitely relevant so thank you
but I I wanted to ask you so like I've
SE I've seen I saw the um I don't know
if it's a paper but you guys were doing
the the neurala morph like um like the
one with the lizard is that the one
you're talking about no no it's not um
I'm going to put I'm going to put a
couple things on the chat right now so
so first is uh Peter Peter Smiley's uh
paper on um competition between subunits
being being used you be becoming a a
type of uh coordination mechanism for
for morphology and this business of
growing something of finite size that
does stop is really critical and and you
can see you can see in Peter's um in
Peter's model how that happens it
basically happens because of competition
for resources and it's a it's a it's a
really cool that that that competition
for resources is a very cool mechanism
for for enabling that and then here's
the um uh here's the neural stuff hold
on
uh so this is this is right here this is
Ben hardle and Sebastian reesi um that's
one way to do it oops and the
other's the other
thing yeah and this and this is the yeah
and this is the evolutionary um
competency the other the other
evolutionary competency model
yeah okay
um yeah thank you so much these are
awesome so but so one of the things I'm
wondering is like um how much of that
because because like the neural CA
they're basically just like a bit
smarter than the ones I'm looking at and
I'm wondering how how much of that like
int like you're basically saying that
these guys in order to do what the
planaria do have to be smart hard than
we kind of than biology kind of
initially thought and and I'm I'm
wondering like how simple do you think
you can get this model to to be in in
order to achieve what the planaria
achieve have you guys like hit the
bottom in terms of the neural CA or do
you think you could go even simpler than
that um no I think you can go simpler
than that and it's some stuff I I have a
student working some stuff I'm not I'm
not it's still it's still very early
days we need to check so I'm not really
ready to talk about it until I check it
and make sure that that everything is
what what I think it is but but no um it
is much it's it's even much earlier than
that and actually I'll I'll I'll show
you something else um hold on I'm just
taking a taking a note
here and yeah okay so so there's this
other thing that you can look at which
because because I'm because of all the
world the work on diverse intelligence
and and basil cognition I'm really
interested in this question of like what
are the simplest systems that show this
kind of Competency right yes and it
turns
out so we started looking at it in very
simple things so we started looking at
it in sorting algorithms I don't know if
you've seen this this paper that we have
on sorting and there's and there's a
couple of um blog posts I have about it
but basically basically there's some of
this already in in like bubble sort
already does some of this so so very
simple systems like extremely simple
deterministic system already do this and
I think uh you know I I think there's a
ton of such competencies to be to be
discovered and I have a I have a student
working on some of this in in various
kinds of Casa okay so what sorry if this
is like you know I don't want to waste
your time and ask you questions that
you've already answered 100 times but
I'm wondering if what are the features
you're looking for when you're trying to
get the simplest possible model what is
what is the most essential things you're
trying to cap
that you see in the
planar I mean the Home Run is is for
better for for lack of a better
vocabulary creative problem solving
because we see the kind of thing we see
in biological tissues is not just
homeostasis or anything like that it's
it's also the ability to creatively come
up with solutions that that they've
never seen before in evolution so um
uh like like in in plaria for example
there's we have this this thing where um
we we put them in barium chloride and
barium is a non-specific Blocker of
potassium channels so the cells are very
unhappy in particular all the neurons in
the head are very unhappy because they
can't pass potassium so there so so over
over a day their their heads explode
like they they literally their heads
explode but then if you if you leave
them in the barium after about a week or
two they grow back a new head and the
new head is completely insensitive to
the baring like no problem and so and so
we ask the question what's different
about these new heads compared to the
old heads and we found out that they
they express um under a dozen new genes
that enable them to live with to to
basically get all their business done
with blocked pottassium CHS and that's
amazing plaria never there's no pressure
in the wild to be to be resistant to
Barium uh how do you in the 20,000
dimensional uh action space how do you
find exactly those few genes that are
going to help you because what you don't
have time for is to randomly poke around
in that space and see what happens
there's not time for these cells um
proliferate quite slowly it's not like
bacteria so you don't have time for some
sort of gradient descent uh in fact if
you start messing around with different
genes you're going to kill yourself long
before you find the solution so so this
question of how the living material
first of all uh is able to to achieve
the standard outcome despite all the
noise and unreliability of the of the
substrate but also find new Solutions
whether they be physiological Solutions
like for barium or anatomical Solutions
and behavioral Solutions like for anthr
robots and
xenobots it's it's it's it's you know
there's some there's some degree of
homeostasis and navigation of that
anatomical space but also towards novel
Solutions which which I think is just
the exact same thing as as creative
problem solving so that's the kind of
thing we we want to see and so what that
means is we put these things in weird
scenarios and we see what they do and
it's just like it's Behavior it's
basically Behavior signs and and what
you'll see in that sorting algorithms
paper is that we yeah we we found
different different ways of looking at
what they're doing and and we started um
uh interfering with it and we found all
kinds of crazy competencies like delayed
gratification turns out turns out uh the
sorting Al algorithms can do delay
gratification um you know who knew
because it's not in the algorithm right
and so and so it's not just complexity
it's not just unpredictability it's
actually uh you know different degrees
of of problem solving
competencies so so so that's the kind of
thing we want to see you know I want to
see it and and part of it is part of it
what what makes it really hard but also
really fun is that it isn't enough to um
be able to
quantify like like like I like I like
what what you guys have with the with
the persistence because it's not enough
to say I want the same shape I had
before because that it it doesn't just
find new solutions to the same uh uh set
point it actually finds novel if it
actually finds novel problems to solve
so so an anthropod is not an answer to
the question of how to be a good a good
human embryo that's not what it's doing
it's it's it's doing something
completely different and so being able
to quantify that and recognize that is
really hard because it's basically like
in the field of um what is it open uh
open-ended evolution in aif right it's
like you can do it but but what's what
what what do you reward for if you don't
know what you know if you don't want to
constrain what it's going to find what
do you reward for so so I like this I
like this business of uh of of the
growth control but I also I also think
you guys should look for other aspects
that are interesting so for example so
I'll give you I'll give you an example
um look look for some kind of
morphogenesis so like not just growth
control like in Peter so so in Peter
Smiley's paper that I just put up we we
look for two things we we rewarded for a
couple of different things um we
rewarded
for uh growth control so size and Sh and
things like that but also for for
specific shapes and specific topological
relationships so can you evolve you know
or or can you find something that makes
a specific shape let's say multiple
layers or you know some some kind of
topology that's that's like more more
biological that kind of thing yeah yeah
we've looked at um in the other post we
look or Stephen W really looked at
aspect ratio yeah but that's good that's
good we did that Peter's Peter Peter did
that exactly that he looked he looked at
aspect ratio so that's so that's pretty
good um yeah you know I I and I I love
morphogenesis as a um as a as a behavior
you know in in anatomical space so I
would I would recommend thinking about
that looking at looking at different
aspects of the shapes you know like
aspect ratio is good then going going
beyond that too that's that's what we do
in in in Ben Ben hardless paper that I
just put up is look at um look at the
ability to regenerate um after after um
anatomical damage this's actually by the
way there's a couple of other papers uh
coming soon
um that uh on this on this of topic that
might be interesting when as soon as as
soon as we've we've got it uh you know
wrapped up I'll I'll I'll send I'll send
it to you okay yeah thank you um so so I
was
wondering like so these are kind of
simple models but I know you guys have
also done like more complicated trying
to get closer to act like actually how
it works yeah and um I was just
wondering like how well do you guys feel
like you understand the actual like so
bubble sort has many of the features but
obviously it's not actually doing bubble
swort but so the question is like the
actual mechanism that it uses how well
do you understand that yeah well that's
an interesting philosophical question so
so let's we need we need to Define
mechanism and we need to Define
understand
so we we our situation is somewhat like
Neuroscience in that if you're looking
at the proximal mole ular mechanism we
understand it quite well we know we know
that a lot of this is is mediated by
bioelectrical circuits we know the
molecules involved we know we we can see
the electrical computations happening
like the mechanisms aspect of it we have
it but but that by itself is is utterly
unsatisfying because it's kind of like
saying you understand the computer
because you understand copper and
silicon and you can watch the electrons
flow like like yeah great but but what's
the computation that it's actually doing
that's that's a much more a much more
challenging thing so so we have a little
bit of it but what we're trying to do is
exactly what the neuroscientists are
trying to do which is neural decoding uh
we except except not in neurons so right
so so we see the electrical activity we
model it as a
navigating agent like like a like an
animal basically navigating anatomical
space and we try to understand uh we try
to understand what are what are the
algorithms that guide that um that guide
that navigation right
right so so so some of so some of that
we have and and and we have it to the to
the extent that we can make TPS with
eyes on their tails and two-headed flat
worms and we can fix certain kinds of
birth effects and we can induce certain
kinds of regenerative events so so we're
obviously we've got the interface we're
obviously sort of learning some of the
prompts that that we can give it um but
but and I really think that's what's
going on here this is this is I I don't
think medicine is going to be solved by
mechanical um kinds of approaches and
not feed forward emergence I think all
of all of this is prompt and I think
this is why we have so few good drugs in
the sense of Dependable efficacy and um
consistent uh you know lack of side
effects in among among patients like we
have very few drugs that actually fix
anything because because we're trying to
micromanage the holding down of specific
molecular States and instead what we
should be doing is developing prompts
for the decision-making intelligence
that's that's implemented by these
physiological
circuits yeah um so like if when you're
when you're making a uh when you're do
basically writing to the the organism
like do is it is it is it set up so that
like there's only a few cells that
control is it like so I know you say
it's hierarchical but like how
hierarchical is it like can you just um
send one input to a single cell and then
how much of that organism can you change
based on changing just one like node in
the network yeah in some cases in some
cases that's exactly how it works so for
example when you when we we can we can
induce basically metastatic melanoma in
a normal tatle no no drugs no
carcinogens no enogen no DNA damage and
you can do that by by messing up the
electrical um Comm communication with
some cells it only takes about three
cells in the whole in the whole tple
before they trigger every other
melanocyte to go to go metastatic so so
sometimes that works um we have we have
other examples where what we do is is
manipulate uh it doesn't even have to be
uh geometrically proximal we can we
we've shown both in cancer and in brain
repair that you can actually trigger
cells on the opposite side of the animal
and still get and get effects on the
other side
so these things these things move so
there are waves of of propag like
propagating waves of this information
that go through
tissue and um which we can now see to
some extent we have now a visualization
modality for it and and and my favorite
my favorite story it goes about this it
goes years back is when you when you
induce a an ectopic eye on the on the
tail of a or in the gut of a taple you
don't have to hit a lot of cells if when
you sectional eyes you often find out
that we actually only hit a small number
of cells but what they did was recruit
all their neighbors to help them build
this structure right and right so it's
like and a lot of collective
intelligences do this ants obviously do
this too right when they come across
something too heavy for them to LIF they
recruit their their nestmates to come
and to come and help so it's kind of
like a feature of a a self-scaling
property of of of collective
intelligence of certain kinds but
there's a there's a more interesting
piece to the story which is that
sometimes you do this you get no eye at
all and when you look what's actually
happening is that there's kind of a
battle of uh patterns going on there
because because the cells we injected
are saying to their neighbors you you
you should help us to build an eye and
then and all the neighbors they have a
tumor suppression mechanism that says
you guys have crazy voltage you should
stay skinned and and that's what they
normally that's what cells normally do
to to suppress neighbors that Acquire
start to acquire weird voltage patterns
is they they use these gab Junctions to
equalize it out they try to buffer it
out so and that's and that's a that's a
you know a ubiquitous cancer suppression
mechanism so you have this you have this
battle and sometimes the eye the eye
story wins and sometimes the the skin
story wins because I really think it's
it's fundamentally a battle of patterns
and which ones are the most convincing
to these cells and and so sometimes you
get an eye and sometimes you get nothing
you know you get you get your normal
organ so so so that's the other thing is
is that I think there's a lot of um both
both competition and cooperation and and
some of it takes place from the
perspective of the cells but some of it
I think takes place from the perspective
of the patterns you
know yeah God so freaking cool man